[Unknown]: IVM
[Amit Varma]: I am Amit Varma, and in my weekly podcast, The Seen and the Unseen, I take a shot at
[Amit Varma]: answering all these questions and many more. I aim to go beyond the scene and show you
[Amit Varma]: the unseen effects of public policy and private action. I speak to experts on economics, politics,
[Amit Varma]: It's quite common these days for me to be at a restaurant or a retail
[Amit Varma]: outlet and the cashier asks me for my phone number.
[Amit Varma]: I always say no.
[Amit Varma]: I value my privacy and I'm not giving my phone number to anyone.
[Amit Varma]: This is all very well in the offline world or meet space as we used to call it once upon
[Amit Varma]: a time.
[Amit Varma]: But what do you do online?
[Amit Varma]: Apps on your phone these days have permissions to your photo library and your SMSs and your
[Amit Varma]: microphone and whichever folder in your brain contains your innermost thoughts and feelings.
[Amit Varma]: Everything we do is constantly being tracked online.
[Amit Varma]: You're usually too exhausted to do anything about this so we just give in thinking, hey,
[Amit Varma]: what difference does it make?
[Amit Varma]: At the most, they'll give me targeted ads.
[Amit Varma]: But actually, your data is worth a lot more than that.
[Amit Varma]: And it can be misused in more ways than just a serving of targeted ads.
[Amit Varma]: Your data is who you are and someone else may be in control.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Unknown]: Our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My topic for today's show is the GDPR or the General Data Protection Regulation, a regulation
[Amit Varma]: that has just come in place in Europe to protect the data and the privacy of its citizens.
[Amit Varma]: It has come about with the very best of intentions and has both intended seen effects and unintended
[Amit Varma]: unseen effects.
[Amit Varma]: My guest on the show today is Manasa Venkatraman, a legal expert and a policy analyst who is
[Amit Varma]: a special interest in privacy and data protection.
[Amit Varma]: She works at the Takshashila Institution in Bangalore.
[Amit Varma]: But before I begin my conversation with her, a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If this happens to be the only podcast you listen to, well, you need to listen to some
[Amit Varma]: more.
[Amit Varma]: Check out the ones from IBM podcast who co-produced the show with me.
[Amit Varma]: Go to IBM podcast.com or download the IBM app and you'll find a host of great Indian
[Amit Varma]: podcasts that cover every subject you could think of.
[Amit Varma]: From the magazine I edit, Pragati, I think, Pragati.com, there is the Pragati podcast
[Amit Varma]: hosted by Hamsini Hariharan and Pawan Srinath.
[Amit Varma]: There is a brilliant Hindi podcast, Hulia Bazi, hosted by Pranay Koteswamy and Sourabh
[Amit Varma]: Chandra.
[Amit Varma]: And apart from these policy podcasts, IBM has shows that cover music, films, finance,
[Amit Varma]: sports, sci-fi, tech, and the LGBT community all under one roof or rather all in one app.
[Amit Varma]: So download the IBM podcast app today.
[Guest]: Hi Manasa, welcome to the scene in the unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you for having me.
[Amit Varma]: So we're going to try a new experiment from this episode onwards, which is I always sort
[Amit Varma]: of presume that the listener has the same familiarity with the guest as I may, which
[Amit Varma]: may not always be the case.
[Amit Varma]: So before we start talking about GDPR, let's talk a little bit more about yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Where do you come from?
[Guest]: What do you do?
[Guest]: I am a lawyer.
[Guest]: And right after law school, I started working in corporate law in Bombay.
[Guest]: Then I decided to sort of redeem my soul, do some good deeds for a change.
[Guest]: And I, I think I always knew I wanted to be part of the law making process than the law
[Guest]: interpretation and navigating an existing space, which is why I moved to Takshashila.
[Guest]: And over my time there, I've developed an interest in technology law and technology
[Guest]: policy.
[Guest]: And here we are.
[Amit Varma]: And here we are.
[Amit Varma]: And were you always interested in law?
[Amit Varma]: It just happens to be something that you did and you fell in love with it later.
[Guest]: You know, I always wanted to be a journalist.
[Guest]: And it's funny because I went to Xavier's submitted my BA application.
[Guest]: I was like, government law college is right here.
[Guest]: It's just after one signal.
[Guest]: Let me just go put in my application there.
[Guest]: And when I got through to GLC, I was like, let's see where it takes us.
[Guest]: And then eventually I ended up sort of liking dissecting law and stuff like that.
[Amit Varma]: And what are the areas of the law which you found most fascinating?
[Amit Varma]: Like who are the writers and law who you would, you know, enjoy reading the most?
[Amit Varma]: And how did you sort of discover yourself as someone who thinks about, you know, the
[Guest]: law and in general legal philosophy?
[Guest]: So the great thing about the college I studied at is that it has a rich history of alumni.
[Guest]: So Ambedkar was once the principal of the college.
[Guest]: Various freedom fighters were alumni of the college.
[Guest]: But you know, all of that aside, I think the that space allowed me to participate in a
[Guest]: lot of competitions.
[Guest]: Law students have this fun competition, which is called a mock trial.
[Guest]: And I did a lot of that.
[Guest]: And I just liked going up there and sort of being like, no, clause B of section eight
[Guest]: does not allow you to do this, my lord.
[Guest]: And a lot of milliards later, I sort of figured that I liked it.
[Guest]: There is one particular, two particular judges that I really loved reading through law school.
[Guest]: One was Lord Denning, who was a sort of judge in England a really long time ago, sometime
[Guest]: in the 1700s, 1800s.
[Guest]: And one was MC Chagla.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And apart from law, what else interests you?
[Amit Varma]: What do you do?
[Guest]: I like to sing.
[Guest]: But you know, when I sound like a, I don't want to say I sound like a creepy nightwatch
[Guest]: man on a podcast.
[Guest]: You already said it.
[Guest]: We're not editing this out.
[Guest]: I like to sing, I do a little bit of yoga on the side.
[Guest]: But that's about it.
[Amit Varma]: Mostly, I just watch Netflix.
[Amit Varma]: And if there's one book or movie that has really influenced you and made you a different
[Amit Varma]: person, is there something you'd be able to name?
[Guest]: A movie that's made me a different person.
[Amit Varma]: Or a book or, you know, doesn't have to be just one.
[Guest]: Well, there are a couple of books that sort of cemented my, the fact that I wanted to
[Guest]: do public policy.
[Guest]: There's this particular book called Banishing Bureaucracy.
[Guest]: And I read that when I was studying public policy at Takshashila.
[Guest]: And that was just fascinating how much you can do within the government and outside the
[Guest]: government to sort of ramp up how the system works.
[Guest]: And there's this other book called Public Policymaking in India.
[Guest]: It was a textbook.
[Guest]: But I think just the way in which, just the kind of things that you can do to be part
[Guest]: of the process of making your state a better state was kind of, it shaped the way I looked
[Guest]: at the...
[Amit Varma]: So in a sense, you actually want to make the world a better place.
[Guest]: That's where you're in.
[Guest]: That's the grand idea.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And what is Takshashila like for the benefit of my listeners?
[Amit Varma]: Of course, the institution which publishes Pragati, the magazine I edit at thinkpragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: But what else is it?
[Guest]: Tell us.
[Guest]: Takshashila is a think tank and it's a school of public policy.
[Guest]: So these two things are, you know, one can think of them as very parallel tangents, but
[Guest]: we kind of managed to marry them both.
[Guest]: On the one side, we do research on international relations, geopolitics, public finance and
[Guest]: technology.
[Guest]: And on the other side, we teach the basics of public policy to students.
[Guest]: We also have started teaching geo strategy to students.
[Guest]: So we tell them how the learnings that you have from it and other such things.
[Guest]: Takshashila to me is, it's my place of comfort where I can learn, where I can make mistakes
[Guest]: and where I have the space that I need to grow.
[Guest]: And I think that's really what you look for in your workplace when you're starting out
[Guest]: in a career.
[Guest]: So it's a fantastic bunch of people.
[Guest]: It's also increment time there.
[Amit Varma]: I can attest to a fantastic bunch of people.
[Amit Varma]: So let's move on to the subject of the day.
[Amit Varma]: But before we talk about GDPR specifically, let's talk a little bit more about privacy.
[Amit Varma]: Like why is privacy a more important issue today?
[Amit Varma]: And would you say it's a more important issue today than it was, say, 30 years ago?
[Guest]: Definitely.
[Guest]: You know, privacy is an important issue today can be attested by the fact that the statement,
[Guest]: we're in a global village today is now a cliche, right?
[Guest]: And it is a cliche because you hear it every other day.
[Guest]: Because it's happening every minute, we're becoming more and more interconnected.
[Guest]: And that's the thing about technology is that while technological developments multiply
[Guest]: from year to year, the law can only catch up.
[Guest]: Or what the law can do is just create a safe playground for technology to develop.
[Guest]: And in India, we didn't have that safe playground for privacy, which is why last year, the Supreme
[Guest]: Court had to come in and say that no, guys, there is a fundamental right to privacy.
[Guest]: Privacy is important because of how simple it is for us to be connected to one another
[Guest]: from one end of the globe to another end.
[Guest]: And we all know that in the process, our data is trading several hands.
[Guest]: We don't know who has access to our photos.
[Guest]: We don't know how many apps know our phone number.
[Guest]: And we don't know how many apps know our home address and what we look like from the window
[Guest]: of our bedroom.
[Guest]: Privacy is more important now because there are more technologically advanced ways of
[Guest]: knowing about a person than say 50 years ago.
[Guest]: There was probably the telegram 50 years ago, the telephone, the radio, but today you have,
[Guest]: you can look at a person's face when they're sitting in America and you're sitting in India.
[Guest]: While technological developments have opened up a lot of doors in the sense, we don't know
[Guest]: if our private lives have also walked out of these doors.
[Guest]: And that is why it's important to discuss the subject of privacy and how we can still
[Guest]: maintain that while allowing technology into our lives.
[Amit Varma]: Now an argument I've heard from some people is that, listen, okay, our data is out there.
[Amit Varma]: But the only thing that really happens is we get spookily targeted ads.
[Amit Varma]: So if I'm, you know, if I do a search for say shoes, I'll get ads for Reebok and Nike
[Amit Varma]: surf to me the next time I go to Facebook and that's okay.
[Amit Varma]: That's the use of their private data that some people see.
[Amit Varma]: And that's the only interface, so to say, with their data coming back at them that people
[Amit Varma]: are aware of.
[Amit Varma]: What are the dangers of your data being out there unfettered, unprotected?
[Guest]: There are two examples that I want to talk about.
[Guest]: One is from the USA and one is from China, the other end of the world.
[Guest]: We all know what happened between Facebook and Cambridge Analytica and the whole democracy
[Guest]: being taken for granted, being targeted the way they were targeted for ads.
[Amit Varma]: Assuming someone has heard about this for the first time, can you sum it up?
[Guest]: So what happened in the US is two years ago when they held federal elections, elections
[Guest]: for the president.
[Guest]: It came to light later on that this analytics firm called Cambridge Analytica was mining
[Guest]: data of US voters from their Facebook profiles and it managed to target voters in a way that
[Guest]: no other campaign could before.
[Guest]: And while this seems fairly innocent when you hear it, it's problematic because none
[Guest]: of the voters knew that they were being approached for their votes.
[Guest]: This wasn't made clear.
[Guest]: So in a way it was manipulative.
[Amit Varma]: It was deceptive that the voter who signed on to Facebook did not know his data was going
[Guest]: to be used like that.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So that's one example of how your data can actually be used to influence democratic processes.
[Guest]: The second example is all the way across the globe in China.
[Guest]: They're doing something called the social credit system.
[Guest]: So apparently China doesn't have a rich history of banks lending money to people.
[Guest]: And banks generally give out loans when they know that someone has the ability to pay back.
[Guest]: But now China wants to move towards a more institutional credit giving system, which
[Guest]: is allow banks to do it.
[Guest]: But banks don't know if they give money to the next person, if that guy is going to pay
[Guest]: back or not.
[Guest]: So what China is doing is something, it's collecting data about every person within
[Guest]: China through their behavior on apps like WeChat, Alibaba, this and that.
[Guest]: And it's putting all of this data together, creating a very personalized profile of this
[Guest]: person.
[Guest]: And on the basis of what he looks like, on the basis of what his data tells the government
[Guest]: about him, loans will be given out.
[Guest]: Now, the problem with this is that it can be easily used by the state to discriminate.
[Guest]: And I think they saw a couple of examples of this in the US, when black people were
[Guest]: not given loans.
[Guest]: Basically, black people were discriminated against because of the areas that they lived
[Guest]: in.
[Guest]: And because they generally did not have the kind of information that the computer was
[Guest]: able to think was believable or reliable.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And what you protest here, is it the intended use of what appears to be a really efficient
[Amit Varma]: credit rating agency where it gets much more information than credit rating agencies otherwise
[Amit Varma]: would?
[Amit Varma]: Or is what you're protesting the fact that it's a state which has this data at its fingertips
[Amit Varma]: and states are of course, always subverted, there is always regulatory capture.
[Amit Varma]: And it's not good for democracy, which is moot in the example of China.
[Amit Varma]: But in general, it's not good for democracy if the state has all this information.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: I'm protesting both.
[Guest]: On the first point, yes, we don't know the intended usage today, maybe to give out loans
[Guest]: to people who can pay back.
[Guest]: But you don't know if five years down the line, that will still be the purpose.
[Guest]: And by then, they would have been empowered with all the data they need to do what they
[Guest]: can with it.
[Guest]: And the second point is, you're absolutely right, all the data, let's take Aadhaar data,
[Guest]: for example, that rests with the ruling government today.
[Guest]: And that's one of the dangers of giving all your information to the ruling government,
[Guest]: that they can use that and manipulate that to stay in power.
[Guest]: Democratic processes are at a very dangerous place if this is going to happen.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing to remember is, and I'm actually old enough to remember this, but in the 1984
[Amit Varma]: riots, the rioters, if we call them that were actually given electoral roles, so they could
[Amit Varma]: identify which houses Sikh families lived in.
[Amit Varma]: So it was, you know, targeted to that extent.
[Amit Varma]: And that's just a very small subset of the data that is actually out there.
[Amit Varma]: If you can target better than that, and if you can do more insidious things and necessarily
[Amit Varma]: go to their houses and burn them, then the scope for the state harassing a citizen just
[Amit Varma]: goes up exponentially.
[Guest]: There's no limit to it.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: Just like tech developing exponentially, the power of the state to do whatever it wants
[Amit Varma]: also increases that much.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So the question here is that, in general, does the citizen need protection from the
[Amit Varma]: state as well?
[Amit Varma]: And if so, how does that come about, given that any laws and any regulations that would
[Amit Varma]: happen would have to come from the state itself?
[Guest]: I think that's where the GDPR comes in.
[Guest]: Any law that seeks to protect a citizen has to obviously have their rights at its centre.
[Guest]: So for example, if I have 60 apps on my phone, that's 60 terms and conditions that I haven't
[Guest]: read.
[Guest]: 60 privacy policies that can do whatever they want, because I haven't read them.
[Guest]: If the state wants to protect my rights and to protect my privacy, the law should say
[Guest]: that irrespective of what is contained in these terms and conditions, the person collecting
[Amit Varma]: them is still accountable for it.
[Amit Varma]: And there's XYZ things you cannot do.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: And that's where the state comes in.
[Guest]: Of course, like you're saying, the state finally holds the pen to the paper.
[Guest]: And in that sense, the power is a little lopsided, because we want them to do one thing, but
[Guest]: they have the ultimate word on the matter, which is why what we're doing in India is
[Guest]: really great.
[Guest]: There are public consultations that are being held.
[Guest]: There is an independent committee that is proposing what the law should look like.
[Guest]: And then there's a Supreme Court that has this matter in its mind, and that is thinking
[Guest]: correctly about this topic.
[Guest]: So I think we're at a comfortable place in India, a place that we've never been before.
[Guest]: But this moment is also temporary.
[Guest]: And we need to cash in on it as fast as we can.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So and we've done a brainstorm on Pragati, which you led, where a bunch of the people
[Amit Varma]: who are stakeholders, speaking on behalf of civil society actually wrote long pieces about
[Amit Varma]: their vision of what data protection should look like from Rahul Mathand to Nikhil Pawar
[Amit Varma]: and Malvika.
[Amit Varma]: Before we come back to India, which I want to do at the end of the show, in any case,
[Amit Varma]: let's talk a little bit about GDPR now, like, what was the evolution of the GDPR at around
[Amit Varma]: what time did it begin to take shape?
[Amit Varma]: And what were the different kinds of demands and pressures on it?
[Guest]: Europe was thinking about privacy and data protection long before we were long before
[Guest]: even the rest of the world was.
[Amit Varma]: And by Europe, you mean EU or do you in general mean different countries within Europe, the
[Guest]: EU?
[Guest]: I mean, the EU as one collective body.
[Guest]: So in 1996, EU had a directive on data protection.
[Guest]: And before that, in the 80s, they had another law talking about privacy.
[Guest]: So EU has actually been thinking about this subject for a long time now, 20-25 years.
[Amit Varma]: So very proactively and long before the internet reached anywhere near its current extent.
[Guest]: And if anything, they've kind of walked alongside the internet, walked alongside technology
[Guest]: and tried to make robust laws in that sense, which is how the GDPR was born two years ago.
[Guest]: And while it came into effect last Friday, 25th May, it was actually passed two years
[Guest]: ago and they gave like a two year window for all companies everywhere in the world to comply
[Guest]: with their law.
[Guest]: The GDPR is a great format from the perspective of the kind of rights that an individual has.
[Guest]: Right from, you know, asking a company what kind of information they have about her to
[Guest]: the right to be forgotten.
[Guest]: Everything is there in that law.
[Guest]: So in that sense, it's a very ambitious project and it's great that they've seen it to fruition.
[Guest]: But the GDPR also has its drawbacks because it puts a lot of pressure on businesses.
[Guest]: So it's like a seesaw where the user was once at the lower end, the user has gone up now
[Guest]: considerably, but the businesses have taken all the burden.
[Guest]: Be that as it may, to my mind, the GDPR is a great precedent for us to work off of because
[Guest]: of how comprehensive it is.
[Guest]: So like I was saying, it talks not only about the rights of every individual, it also says
[Guest]: that, you know, you will, if you don't comply with the GDPR, your punishment will be up
[Guest]: to 4% of your annual turnover.
[Guest]: For a big company that might, you know, that might just be like a pinch in their pockets,
[Amit Varma]: but for startups working in Europe, it's death.
[Amit Varma]: Even for a big company, 4% of turnover is a hell of a lot because it's not 4% of profits
[Guest]: is 4% of turnover.
[Guest]: Yes, yes.
[Amit Varma]: So before we proceed, did the GDPR come about more because of pressure from civil society
[Amit Varma]: activists as we see in India, for example, or was it a proactive bureaucracy, which in
[Amit Varma]: any case was seized with the need to do something about this space?
[Amit Varma]: Or was it even a lucky consequence of every bureaucracy's tendency to try and overregulate
[Amit Varma]: everything?
[Guest]: That's a very interesting way to put it.
[Guest]: While I'm not sure how proactive the civil society was in pushing this law forward, there
[Guest]: definitely seems to be a sort of bureaucratic action that was taken over time, which led
[Guest]: us to the GDPR.
[Guest]: The third point, yes, I think a lot of it was also serendipity, in a sense, because
[Guest]: when Brexit happened, turns out that Cambridge Analytica did some, you know, a little bit
[Guest]: of games over there as well.
[Guest]: And over the years, there have been enough data leaks, enough data breaches, enough phishing
[Guest]: incidents for governments to sit up and take notice.
[Guest]: Not so much for us in India, maybe, but, you know, several incidents do come to mind in
[Guest]: the Western world, which might have prompted this to happen.
[Amit Varma]: Right, and governments do take threats to their power seriously, which, you know, all
[Amit Varma]: of this is.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: So what do you feel about the GDPR personally?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I can see that you are glad that it takes the rights of the individual seriously
[Amit Varma]: and puts them, you know, firmly at the centre of what the law is all about.
[Amit Varma]: But on the whole, what are your feelings about the law?
[Guest]: My only sort of worry with the GDPR is that it might not be an enduring law.
[Guest]: And that's the danger that every law that deals with technology faces.
[Guest]: Like I said earlier, because tech sort of leaps into the future, whereas the law sort
[Guest]: of crawls behind it, it's very easy for a lot to become redundant.
[Guest]: The Information Technology Act in India is now, you know, it's there in the background
[Guest]: somewhere.
[Guest]: That's my worry with the GDPR.
[Guest]: So for example, it says that the user has all of these rights, and that's great.
[Guest]: But it still says that every company has to communicate the terms and conditions to the
[Guest]: user and they have to communicate it in simple terms.
[Guest]: They can even use pictures.
[Guest]: That's a great idea that I will come to later.
[Guest]: But the fact is that I as a user, I'm going to get tired of reading the same terms and
[Guest]: conditions reading the same language.
[Guest]: As an example, over the last week, we've all received a lot of spam.
[Guest]: Whenever we logged into the internet saying we've changed our privacy policy, how many
[Guest]: of us actually read them?
[Guest]: So this is the first failing of the GDPR.
[Amit Varma]: We're recording this on June 1, by the way, it'll it'll release a while later, week and
[Guest]: a half later.
[Guest]: Okay, great.
[Amit Varma]: I hope we'll get more of this spam.
[Amit Varma]: The weird thing is, I know that there's been all the spam, but I haven't noticed a single
[Amit Varma]: mail which has come to me asking me to re-read anything.
[Amit Varma]: Really?
[Amit Varma]: Really nice.
[Guest]: They don't care about me.
[Guest]: So that's one thing.
[Guest]: And that's the problem because the crux of the issue is not lack of consent.
[Guest]: Yes, there is when I am accepting terms and conditions.
[Guest]: I don't do it knowingly, because I don't read them.
[Guest]: So the problem is consent is just a symptom of the larger problem of fatigue.
[Guest]: Even if you use pictures, even if you use a video as your terms and conditions, at some
[Guest]: point I will just stop caring.
[Guest]: Because I will be downloading so many apps, I'll be going on so many websites, that I'll
[Guest]: be sort of bombarded with these things all around.
[Amit Varma]: And the fatigue will catch up.
[Guest]: The term you used for this was consent fatigue.
[Guest]: Yes, consent fatigue.
[Guest]: GDPR does not solve for consent fatigue.
[Amit Varma]: That's the first problem with the law.
[Guest]: How could it solve for consent fatigue?
[Guest]: By saying that, by shifting the onus from the user to the person collecting the data.
[Amit Varma]: So every data collector would then have a list of A, B, C, D, these are the things you
[Amit Varma]: need to do.
[Amit Varma]: And so it's like a standard, like if you exist, you are automatically, you have to fulfill
[Guest]: those requirements.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: It's like, you know, something like an auditor going to a company once a year to check their
[Guest]: books of accounts.
[Guest]: If you do the same kind of thing with data, if you have a bunch of people who are now
[Guest]: qualified to be data auditors, then you shift the burden from every user to actually the
[Guest]: company, because the company has to show year on year that it's complying with the law,
[Guest]: it's complying with the A, B, C, D things that it can and cannot do.
[Guest]: So that's one way to solve for consent fatigue.
[Guest]: There are many.
[Guest]: But that's the first that comes to mind.
[Guest]: To come back to your earlier question, actually, the GDPR is a mixed bag, because it's the
[Guest]: first, you know, in history, when you trace back to how a thing started, you find that
[Guest]: the first act that started an entire momentum had many flaws, but it kind of gave the push
[Guest]: that the rest of the world needed.
[Guest]: I have a feeling that GDPR will be something like that.
[Amit Varma]: Eventually, we'll get to a very good mean that solves all these problems, but we'll
[Amit Varma]: jugaad our way to that situation.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to delve more deeply into the unseen effects of the GDPR as it now stands.
[Amit Varma]: But before we do that, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Unknown]: So it's been another great week on IBM, and we're hoping that you enjoy all of the podcasts
[Unknown]: that we're being able to get out to you.
[Unknown]: As always, if you're not following us, please do follow us on IBM podcasts on all the social
[Unknown]: media platforms.
[Unknown]: This week on Keeping It Queer, Naveen spoke to Ankit Das Gupta, the social media content
[Unknown]: manager at Mirror Now.
[Unknown]: On Who's Your Mommy, Vedha discusses mom bods and the toll a pregnancy can take on women.
[Unknown]: On Vartalav, Akash and Naveen exchange stories with boys from the Bombay Hem Company.
[Unknown]: On Pragati, Pawan and Hamsini are joined by Dr. Shambhavi Nayak to discuss the Nipah virus
[Unknown]: and discuss the nitty gritties of this new disease.
[Unknown]: On Simplified, Narayan and Chuck break down the difference between schizophrenia and split
[Unknown]: personality on a shorty.
[Unknown]: It's been a really, really great week, and I hope that you're going to listen to all
[Unknown]: of these shows, or at least some of them.
[Unknown]: In the meantime, let me get you onto this one.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back from the commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: While you were away, we have collected all your data and hey, good looking.
[Amit Varma]: So Manasa, coming back to the GDPR, let's talk about I mean, the show is called the
[Amit Varma]: seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: So let's talk about some of the unseen effects or rather the unintended consequences of the
[Amit Varma]: GDPR as it stands now.
[Guest]: Well, the first unintended consequences what we spoke about.
[Amit Varma]: Constant fatigue.
[Amit Varma]: People won't read it anyway.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, yes.
[Guest]: And, you know, I'm actually interested to know if there are any behavioral economics
[Guest]: papers or sort of trivia that prove consent fatigue to be real.
[Guest]: And if you do have any examples, do comment below.
[Amit Varma]: Do comment below.
[Guest]: We don't have comments enabled.
[Amit Varma]: I'm sure your colleague Nidhi, who's an expert in behavioral economics would be able to conduct
[Guest]: experiments with those kinds of data.
[Guest]: Yes, yes.
[Guest]: Even if you're listening.
[Guest]: Well, the second unintended consequence of the GDPR is that I don't know if many startups
[Guest]: are going to start up in the EU region anymore because of the high costs of doing it.
[Guest]: And while you know, this this feels like a very careless argument to make, why should
[Guest]: a business thrive if it does so at the cost of my privacy?
[Guest]: And I'm not saying that's the way for it to do, for it to thrive.
[Guest]: But the GDPR tilts everything against a startup.
[Guest]: It puts unbearable pressure on the startup to comply.
[Guest]: And eventually just kills that kind of ecosystem over them.
[Guest]: The kind of next unintended consequence of the GDPR is how long it will actually last.
[Guest]: I want so we're already seeing examples of US media stopping to serve people in the EU
[Guest]: region because of the high costs of complying with the GDPR.
[Guest]: I want to know how much further this will deteriorate.
[Guest]: And my sense is that in a couple of years, we'll see all of these unintended consequences
[Guest]: come to life.
[Amit Varma]: And also, there's also the broader philosophical question that ultimately every transaction
[Amit Varma]: in the marketplace is between two consenting parties.
[Amit Varma]: And here, of course, because it's impossible for most users to really consent or even understand
[Amit Varma]: what is being proposed to have the GDPR to protect their rights and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But if the GDPR goes too far and over regulates, then it actually, it creates a negative sum
[Amit Varma]: game because it's harder for the business to exist.
[Amit Varma]: And it's harder for the consumer to get the benefit that he would otherwise have gotten
[Amit Varma]: out of that business existing.
[Amit Varma]: And just in the last week since the GDPR has been implemented, and we're recording this
[Amit Varma]: on June 1, a lot of international websites because they cannot comply or don't want to
[Amit Varma]: comply have been blocking EU users entirely.
[Amit Varma]: For example, you know, there are newspapers like the Chicago Tribune and the Los Angeles
[Guest]: Times, there is unrolled.me, Instapaper, which have all blocked EU users, suddenly that entire
[Amit Varma]: group of users doesn't have access to them, or they get stripped down versions of the
[Amit Varma]: service, which is especially hurtful in the case of NPR, National Public Radio, which
[Amit Varma]: EU is now getting a stripped down version of not the full version because they simply
[Amit Varma]: can't comply.
[Amit Varma]: And a bunch of companies such as cloud, KLOU2, and various online video games have stopped
[Amit Varma]: operating in the EU, have stopped, they were operating now they've stopped operating
[Amit Varma]: there.
[Amit Varma]: Because of this.
[Amit Varma]: All this is an unseen cost, all the value that these companies and services were bringing
[Amit Varma]: to users are an unseen cost.
[Amit Varma]: But how would you mitigate for that?
[Amit Varma]: Like when you know, you're regulating what is essentially virgin territory, no one's
[Amit Varma]: really done that no one knows the consequences.
[Guest]: Where have they gone wrong?
[Guest]: So this is something that I read in Justice Shri Krishna's white paper, which is our own
[Guest]: Indian way of arriving at a data protection law.
[Guest]: There are three kinds of regulation.
[Guest]: One is self regulation, which is when you let the market sort of develop its own practices.
[Guest]: The second kind is a core regulatory model, which is you handhold companies, you handhold
[Guest]: private players as much as you can.
[Guest]: And the law steps in and says, you know, broadly, you can't do these three, four things.
[Guest]: But everything else you guys figure out how you want to develop best practices.
[Guest]: The third kind of regulation is full on state.
[Guest]: It's called command and control regulation.
[Guest]: And the GDPR resembles command and control because there is almost no room for companies
[Guest]: and for industry bodies to come together and to develop their own best practices to protect
[Guest]: privacy.
[Guest]: And that I think is the ultimate.
[Guest]: If I had to give like a TLDR of the GDPR and why it won't last, that would probably be
[Guest]: it because it doesn't engage with all of its stakeholders.
[Guest]: It doesn't give enough room for them to wiggle and sort of figure out what is most comfortable.
[Guest]: It just says you guys have to do this.
[Guest]: These are the rights that every user has.
[Guest]: These are your punishments if you go wrong.
[Guest]: And I don't care what happens, comply.
[Guest]: However big or small you are, comply right now.
[Guest]: And you're right in that that might not be feasible for companies of all sizes.
[Guest]: That might not even be feasible for companies like, I don't know if Pokemon Go would still
[Guest]: be able to survive in the EU.
[Guest]: So I feel like a core regulatory approach, engaging with the stakeholders before...
[Amit Varma]: Which is the second approach that Justice Shri Krishna proposed.
[Guest]: Yes, yes.
[Guest]: And I hope that it's the approach that we take in India, because there is a lot of opinions
[Guest]: floating around about what we can do for privacy.
[Guest]: And that's the best approach when you're talking technology law, right?
[Guest]: Because the government might not know everything there is to know about technology.
[Guest]: Businesses might know 30%.
[Guest]: Me as a consumer might know 30% and everyone else might know 5%.
[Amit Varma]: So you find a way of bringing everyone to the table.
[Amit Varma]: The people who favor the command and control approach could say, hey, look, you know, people
[Amit Varma]: like your Facebooks and your Googles or whatever, and the Ubers, you know, are the people you
[Amit Varma]: should be worried about.
[Amit Varma]: Why bring them to the table?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, their interest is obviously in having as lax regulation as possible, because after
[Amit Varma]: all, data is where they make their money from.
[Amit Varma]: They want to harvest as much data as they can.
[Guest]: But these companies are also reliant on people believing in their products.
[Guest]: And take Google, for example.
[Guest]: There is no sort of motivation for Google to up its privacy policy game in India.
[Guest]: But it does a fantastic job of it.
[Guest]: Every, whenever they update their privacy policy, if it's a big enough update, then
[Guest]: you as a user of Gmail or whatever, are taken through it in great detail.
[Guest]: And it's sort of broken down to you beautifully.
[Guest]: That's because Google has a vested interest in simplifying it.
[Amit Varma]: So that actually then seems to favor the first approach that Justice Shri Krishna mentioned,
[Amit Varma]: because if the market itself is the best regulator, then that's going to do the best job.
[Amit Varma]: Like even with what happened with when, you know, when the Cambridge Analytica scandal
[Amit Varma]: broke, a lot of people reacted with that whole hashtag uninstall Facebook and you know, so
[Amit Varma]: on, which was itself the market sort of striking back.
[Amit Varma]: And do you feel that that's not effective on its own and the government does need to
[Amit Varma]: step in and there needs to be the second approach?
[Guest]: It does just largely for the reason that there is way too much happening right now.
[Guest]: And if each player, if each company is given its own leeway to do to develop it over time,
[Guest]: that's great.
[Guest]: That's a very democratic way of doing it.
[Guest]: But the fact is that we kind of need some level of uniformity at some point, which is
[Guest]: why what the law needs to do is it needs to just have a few principles on which it will
[Guest]: survive.
[Guest]: So for example, let's say accountability is a principle.
[Guest]: Then on the basis of that principle, Google can do whatever it wants to make its product
[Guest]: better.
[Guest]: Uber can do whatever it wants, Facebook and the government can do whatever it wants.
[Amit Varma]: There are these minimum benchmarks it has to meet, which are agreed upon by all stakeholders
[Amit Varma]: and come through that consultative.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So what the law should look to do is just sort of have everyone agree on these frameworks
[Guest]: and on these principles and tell them that you can do three, four things.
[Guest]: You can collect data for the limited purpose of your app.
[Guest]: And you can't say collect data of, you know, their grandmother and their great grandmother
[Guest]: who have passed away before we got freedom.
[Guest]: Before we achieved independence.
[Amit Varma]: We have never got freedom.
[Guest]: We don't.
[Guest]: We're all slaves.
[Guest]: What the law should do is just set out these basic principles and the sort of scope of
[Guest]: what a company can and cannot do, within which the economy can thrive as it does.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: Within which they can get like consent for micro things here and there, you know, additional
[Amit Varma]: forms of.
[Amit Varma]: So let's quickly go through the unseen effects of the GDPR once again, and tell me if I missed
[Amit Varma]: anything.
[Amit Varma]: The first one, of course, is consent fatigue, where consent is required.
[Amit Varma]: But if somebody has 60 apps on their phone, they're having to give consent 60 times and
[Amit Varma]: eventually they just get tired and that consent becomes meaningless per se.
[Amit Varma]: The second is that the cost imposed on businesses goes up drastically.
[Amit Varma]: And that might stop businesses from existing in the first place where they might have been
[Amit Varma]: there.
[Amit Varma]: And the unseen effect of that is all the value which would have been brought to the lives
[Amit Varma]: of users and citizens through those businesses, which now no longer exists.
[Amit Varma]: So what would have been a positive some game effectively is completely reversed.
[Amit Varma]: Both parties lose and no one really gains.
[Amit Varma]: And the third is because technology is always advancing by leaps and bounds ahead of the
[Amit Varma]: law.
[Amit Varma]: The law simply can't keep up.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore it will prove to be inadequate.
[Amit Varma]: Is that an accurate summary?
[Guest]: Have we left out any unseen effects?
[Guest]: That's broadly the accurate summary of the GDPR on its own.
[Guest]: But when we look at it from the context of what it means for India, everyone in India
[Guest]: today knows about the GDPR.
[Guest]: Everyone with a smartphone and enough apps on it knows about GDPR.
[Guest]: And so you know, it's in our conscious mind.
[Guest]: What is important for us is to distinguish ourselves from this law.
[Guest]: It's a great law because it has all these fantastic qualities to it.
[Guest]: But it's also a very controlling law in that sense.
[Guest]: And we are at a...
[Amit Varma]: Give me an example of that if you can.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, what do you mean by a controlling law?
[Guest]: Like I said, it doesn't allow companies and industries to come up with their own regulatory
[Guest]: guidelines or best practices to sort of accommodate to the larger principles of the GDPR.
[Guest]: It's also a controlling law in the amount of penalty that looms over every business's
[Guest]: head.
[Guest]: So in that sense, the GDPR is kind of stringent.
[Guest]: And in India, we're at a great point because we don't have to clean up any mess.
[Guest]: This is the first time we're going to be writing a data protection law.
[Guest]: We don't have a history of it that went wrong and we have to clean that up.
[Guest]: So we should be careful to not be too influenced by the GDPR.
[Guest]: We should adopt a co-regulatory approach so that we avoid the unintended consequence of
[Guest]: over controlling and becoming the new license raj.
[Guest]: We should also try and solve for consent fatigue and sort of stay away from the approach that
[Guest]: the GDPR used.
[Guest]: Yes, user consent is absolutely important.
[Guest]: And I need to know what they're taking from me when I'm getting the benefit of an app.
[Guest]: There is no arguing that.
[Guest]: But the idea is to reduce the information gap between the data collector and the data
[Guest]: user.
[Guest]: And there are more than one ways of doing this.
[Guest]: The terms and conditions are just one instance that the GDPR looks at.
[Guest]: So we need to sort of develop our own flavors of what a data protection law should have
[Guest]: to kind of circumvent the unseen effects.
[Amit Varma]: And how receptive have governments been to this argument about a needing a data protection
[Amit Varma]: law and the right to privacy being important and B to the importance and optimality, if
[Amit Varma]: that's a word, of this consultative process where all the stakeholders together can arrive
[Amit Varma]: at a framework for the law?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So some government wings like the TRAI have shown a lot of interest in this process.
[Guest]: And there have been a couple of bills in the parliament over the last two years on a data
[Guest]: protection law.
[Guest]: While I don't know enough to comment about, you know, whether as a collective body where
[Guest]: the government stands, it's very evident that, you know, individually, people representing
[Guest]: the government are thinking about these things, because they are engaging with their voter
[Guest]: bases on social media.
[Guest]: And they are also benefiting from these services just as much as we are.
[Guest]: So I feel like we're all on about the same page.
[Guest]: We're probably in the same chapter.
[Guest]: And that's a really good place to be.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it sounds like a miracle for a country that tends to overregulate that you actually
[Amit Varma]: have, you know, civil society voices, which are so strong and actually playing a part
[Amit Varma]: in drafting these laws.
[Guest]: Yeah, and in a very constructive way.
[Guest]: I feel like all the ideas that I've heard over the last year of working in this subject
[Guest]: have almost all sort of contributed to some larger relevant point.
[Guest]: And that just goes to show that we all have a lot to learn from each other.
[Guest]: And this is the beauty of the lawmaking process, that you just take everything that benefits
[Guest]: you.
[Amit Varma]: So Manaset was really enlightening, talking to you.
[Amit Varma]: And no doubt the government will hear this episode before the listeners of the seen and
[Amit Varma]: the unseen actually get to do so, which I hope they actually get to do so.
[Amit Varma]: But I'd like to end with, you know, a couple of last questions I always ask all my guests
[Amit Varma]: in the context of whatever subject they're talking about.
[Amit Varma]: What makes you despair and what makes you hopeful about the future of data protection
[Guest]: and privacy in India?
[Guest]: What makes me hopeful is that everyone is thinking about it.
[Guest]: It's relevant for everybody I've met.
[Amit Varma]: And there is so much to do, probably a little bit of selection bias.
[Amit Varma]: My panwala is not thinking about the GDPR.
[Amit Varma]: No, but I'm kidding.
[Amit Varma]: I get your point.
[Guest]: No, I actually disagree.
[Amit Varma]: A data protection law is relevant for everyone, but not everyone is really thinking about
[Amit Varma]: it in that sense.
[Amit Varma]: But the good part is that even the PLU who are thinking about it are much more vocal
[Amit Varma]: than the numbers indicate.
[Guest]: So we are making a lot of noise about it.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: And, you know, when we're teaching public policy to students, we talk about this beautiful
[Guest]: thing called the window of opportunity.
[Guest]: When politics and solutions and problems align, they open the window of opportunity.
[Guest]: And that's the time that you have to make a law or a policy that will bring about change.
[Guest]: I think we're at the point where the window is creaking and we're just opening it up.
[Guest]: And it's good that we're all at it.
[Guest]: What despairs me is our history is not great with making laws for an unknown beast.
[Guest]: So I hope we don't fall into the same trap of over-regulating.
[Guest]: And I hope we sort of give enough room for all stakeholders to wiggle and find their
[Guest]: most comfortable way of complying with the law.
[Guest]: So that's something that I'm kind of wary about.
[Guest]: But I'm largely hopeful, I think.
[Amit Varma]: Excellent.
[Amit Varma]: On that note of hope that we shall all be allowed to continue to wiggle within the window
[Amit Varma]: of opportunity, I can hardly picture it in my head.
[Guest]: Thanks a lot for coming on the show.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, hop on over to seen unseen.in for the archives
[Amit Varma]: of the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I've recorded an episode in the past with Manasa on prostitution.
[Amit Varma]: Do check that out.
[Amit Varma]: And you can follow Manasa on Twitter at NASAC.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma.
[Unknown]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: There she stands, a podcast addict.
[Unknown]: Outside the bank, having travelled several miles to get in with other poor souls like
[Unknown]: her.
[Unknown]: The journey, though daunting for this youngling, will have some comfort because she has downloaded
[Unknown]: her favourite podcast.
[Unknown]: You can see more of her species on IVMPodcasts.com, your one-stop destination where you can check
[Unknown]: out the coolest Indian podcasts.
[Unknown]: Happy listening!